## Sex-specific DNA methylation in saliva from the multi-ethnic Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study

## Citation Information
Reiner A, Bakulski KM, Fisher JD, Dou JF, Schneper L, Mitchell C, Notterman DA, Zawistowski M*, Ware EB*. Sex-specific DNA methylation in saliva from the multi-ethnic Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study. In Review. medRxiv 2022.12.22.22283872; doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.22.22283872

This repository contains code for the main analyses conducted in the manuscript entitled "[Sex-specific DNA methylation on autosomal chromosomes in saliva from the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.12.22.22283872v1)". Data is not able to be shared publicly. 

For code questions, contact Alli Reiner (alreiner@umich.edu).

## Abstract 
**Background**: The prevalence of many diseases differs by sex, potentially due to sex-specific patterns in DNA methylation. Autosomal sex-specific differences in DNA methylation have been observed in cord blood and placental tissue, but are not well studied in saliva or in diverse populations. **Method**: We sought to characterize sex-specific DNA methylation on autosomal chromosomes in saliva samples from children in the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study, a multi-ethnic prospective birth cohort containing an oversampling of Black, Hispanic and low-income families. DNA methylation from saliva samples were analyzed on 796 children at both ages 9 and 15 with DNA methylation measured using the Illumina HumanMethylation 450k array. **Results**: An epigenome-wide association analysis of the age 9 samples identified 8,430 sex-differentiated autosomal DNA methylation sites at age 9 (P < 2.4×10−7), of which 76.2% had higher DNA methylation in female children. The strongest sex-difference was in the cg26921482 probe, in the AMDHD2 gene, with 30.6% higher DNA methylation in female compared to male children (P < 1×10−300). Treating the age 15 samples as an internal replication set, we observed highly consistent results between the age 9 and age 15 measurements, indicating stable and replicable sex-differentiation. Further, we directly compared our results to previously published DNA methylation sex differences in both cord blood and saliva and again found strong consistency. **Conclusion**: Our findings support widespread and robust sex-differential DNA methylation across age, human tissues, and populations. These findings help inform our understanding of potential biological processes contributing to sex differences in human physiology and disease.


